Feature/759/93 test categorize using tags (#125)
agera-edc/DataSpaceConnector: docs/integration-testing.md

system that is not easily mocked or stubbed such as cloud-based databases.

Therefore, in many cases writing unit tests is more involved that writing an integration test, for example say we wanted

> to test our implementation of a CosmosDB-backed queue. We would have to mock the behavior of the CosmosDB API, which -

Reviewer: nit: spurious change?

Author: Yes it was a typo which I fixed but reverted now.

while certainly possible - can get complicated pretty quickly. Now we still might do that for simpler scenarios, but
eventually we might want to write an integration test that uses a CosmosDB test instance.

## Coding Guidelines

> EDC codebase has few annotations to help you write and categorize integration tests. The following are some of the available ones:

Reviewer: I think more relevant is what runtime components are needed to execute the test (e.g. a storage endpoint). That is a more specific definition

Reviewer: done

Reviewer: submitted

- `@IntegrationTest`: Marks an integration test with `integration-test` Junit tag. This is the default tag and can be used if you do not want to specify any other tags on your test to do further categorization.

Below annotations are used to categorize integration tests based on their technologies. All of these annotations are composite annotations and contains `@IntegrationTest` annotation as well.

- `@AzureStorageIntegrationTest`: Marks an integration test with `azure-storage-integration-test` Junit tag. This should be used when the integration test is related to `Azure Storage`.

> - `@AzureCosmosDbIntegrationTest`: Marks an integration test with `azure-cosmosdb-integration-test` Junit tag. This should be used when the integration test is related to `Azure CosmosDB`.

Reviewer: nit: why are the tags not named exactly like the annotations? Wouldn't it be simpler to understand?

Author: Good suggestion. Update tag names and docs.

- `@AwsS3IntegrationTest`: Marks an integration test with `aws-s3-integration-test` Junit tag. This should be used when the integration test is related to `AWS S3`.
- `@DapsTest`: Marks an integration test with `daps-integration-test` Junit tag. This should be used when the integration test is related to `Daps IAM`.

> We encourage you to use these available annotation but if your integration test does not fit in one of these available annotations and you want to categorize them base on their technologies then feel free to create a new annotations but make sure to use composite annotations which contains `@IntegrationTest`. If you do not wish to categorize base on their technologies then you can use already available `@IntegrationTest` annotation.

Author: Updated doc to highlight this. That if your test does not relies on any external system you may not want to use these annotations.

- By default JUnit test runner ignores all integration tests because in root `build.gradle.kts` file we have excluded all tests with `integration-test` Junit tag.

All integration tests should specify annotation to categorize them and the `"...IntegrationTest"` postfix to distinguish them clearly from unit tests. They should reside in the same package as unit tests because all tests should maintain package consistency to their test subject.

> Any credentials, secrets, passwords, etc. that are required by the integration tests should be passed in using environment variables. A good way to access them is `ConfigurationFunctions.propOrEnv()` because then the credentials can also be supplied via system properties.

Reviewer: spurious changes due to reformatting

Author: Updated it. To remove extra reformatting.

This does not at all discourage the use of external test environments like containers, rather, the external system should be deployed in the CI script (e.g. through Github's `services` feature), or there might even be a dedicated test instance running continuously, e.g. a CosmosDB test instance in Azure. In the latter case we need to be careful to avoid conflicts (e.g. database names) when multiple test runners access that system simultaneously and to properly clean-up any residue before and after the test.

## Running them locally

> As mentioned above the JUnit runner won't pick up integration tests unless a tag is provided. For instance if needed to run integration tests related to `Azure CosmosDB` then it can be achieved by passing the `IncludeTags` parameter to the `gradlew` command:

Reviewer: simplify this sentence please

```bash

> ./gradlew test -DIncludeTags="azure-cosmos-db-integration-test"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
./gradlew test -p path/to/module -DIncludeTags="azure-cosmos-db-integration-test"
```

Probably more realistic, since a dev is unlikely to have all emulators running

```

_Cosmos DB integration tests are run by default against a locally running [Cosmos DB Emulator](https://docs.microsoft.com/azure/cosmos-db/local-emulator). You can also use an instance of Cosmos DB running in Azure, in which case you should set the `COSMOS_KEY` environment variable._

if needed to run all kind of tests(e.g. unit & integration) then it can be achieved by passing the `RunAllTest=true` parameter to the `gradlew` command:

```bash
./gradlew test -DRunAllTest="true"
```

If needed to run all integration tests from a module (and all of its sub-modules) then it can be achieved by specifying module project to the `gradlew` command. For example to run all integration tests from Azure cosmos db module and its sub-modules:

```bash
./gradlew -p extensions/azure/cosmos test -DIncludeTags="azure-cosmos-db-integration-test"
```

> _Command as `./gradlew :extensions:azure:cosmos test -DIncludeTags="azure-cosmos-db-integration-test"` does not executed tests from all sub-modules. So we need to use `-p` to specify the module project path._

Reviewer: grammar

> _Command as `./gradlew :extensions:azure:cosmos test -DIncludeTags="azure-cosmos-db-integration-test"` does not executed tests from all sub-modules. So we need to use `-p` to specify the module project path._

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
_Command as `./gradlew :extensions:azure:cosmos test -DIncludeTags="azure-cosmos-db-integration-test"` does not execute tests from all sub-modules so we need to use `-p` to specify the module project path._
```

## Running them in the CI pipeline

All integration tests should go into the [integration test workflow](../.github/workflows/integrationtests.yaml), every "technology" should have its own job, and technology specific tests can be targeted using Junit tags with `-DIncludeTags` property as described above in document.

> For example let's assume we've implemented a Postgres-based Asset Index, then the integration tests for that should go into a "Postgres" `job`, and every module that adds a test (here: `extensions:postgres:assetindex`) should apply a composite annotation (here: `@PostgresIntegrationTest` adding a tag `postgres-integration-test`) on its integration tests this tagging will be used by the CI pipeline step to target and execute the integration tests related to Postgres.

Reviewer: not a Postgres job, a step

Reviewer: Missing full stop before "this tagging"?

Author: - This will be a job. Step is mentioned later in the paragraph ` This tagging will be used by the CI pipeline step to target...`
- Applied the full stop.

system that is not easily mocked or stubbed such as cloud-based databases.

Therefore, in many cases writing unit tests is more involved that writing an integration test, for example say we wanted
to test our implementation of a CosmosDB-backed queue. We would have to mock the behavior of the CosmosDB API, which -
while certainly possible - can get complicated pretty quickly. Now we still might do that for simpler scenarios, but
eventually we might want to write an integration test that uses a CosmosDB test instance.

## Coding Guidelines

EDC codebase has few annotations and these annotation focuses on two important aspects:

- Exclude integration tests by default from JUnit test runner as these tests relies on external systems which might not
be available during a local execution.
- Categorize integration tests with help of
[JUnit Tags](https://junit.org/junit5/docs/current/user-guide/#writing-tests-tagging-and-filtering).

Following are some available annotations:

- `@IntegrationTest`: Marks an integration test with `IntegrationTest` Junit tag. This is the default tag and can be
used if you do not want to specify any other tags on your test to do further categorization.

> Below annotations are used to categorize integration tests based on their technologies. All of these annotations are

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Below annotations are used to categorize integration tests based on the runtime components that must be available for the test to run. All of these annotations are
```

composite annotations and contains `@IntegrationTest` annotation as well.

- `@AzureStorageIntegrationTest`: Marks an integration test with `AzureStorageIntegrationTest` Junit tag. This should be

> used when the integration test is related to `Azure Storage`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
used when the integration test requires the Azure Storage emulator to run.
```

- `@AzureCosmosDbIntegrationTest`: Marks an integration test with `AzureCosmosDbIntegrationTest` Junit tag. This should

> be used when the integration test is related to `Azure CosmosDB`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
be used when the integration test requires the Azure CosmosDB emulator to run.
```

- `@AwsS3IntegrationTest`: Marks an integration test with `AwsS3IntegrationTest` Junit tag. This should be used when the

> integration test is related to `AWS S3`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
integration test requires the AWS S3 storage emulator to run.
```

- `@DapsTest`: Marks an integration test with `DapsIntegrationTest` Junit tag. This should be used when the integration

> test is related to `Daps IAM`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
test requires....
```

Author: Applied. thanks

## Coding Guidelines

> An integration test should have an annotation e.g.`@IntegrationTest, @AzureCosmosDbIntegrationTest` which causes the test runner to ignore it unless the

Reviewer 3: Ok, I see now you are using these annotations to add the corresponding tags in addition to checking the `RUN_INTEGRATION_TEST` flag. Have you considered using `@IntegrationTest` together with `@Tag` directly on the tests? We can define constants for the possible tag values. I think it might lead to more concise code.

> An integration test should have an annotation e.g.`@IntegrationTest, @AzureCosmosDbIntegrationTest` which causes the test runner to ignore it unless the

Author: Updated to use composite annotation and removed use of RUN_INTEGRATION_TEST environment variable. Please take a look now.

> `RUN_INTEGRATION_TEST` environment variable is set to `true` and also categorize them using [Junit Tags](https://junit.org/junit5/docs/current/user-guide/#writing-tests-tagging-and-filtering). This categorization is important because it allows us discover and executed specific set of integration tests.

Reviewer: why do we need both a property and an environment variable? Seems overly complex.

Author: Here environment variable is used to by default not execute integration tests. (This is already used in EDC). I thought of removing this environment variable  but then we have the following situation. 

- We need one common tag (or list of tags) for Junit excludeTags() option which prevents these tests from executing by default.
- If we go with one common tag approach then for executing any specific IT test required additional params. For comparison currently to execute a particular test in minicube.sh we do 
`./gradlew :samples:04.0-file-transfer:integration-tests:test --tests org.eclipse.dataspaceconnector.samples.FileTransferAsClientIntegrationTest`  but then we have to always apply the include tags options also, which mean above command will become

`./gradlew :samples:04.0-file-transfer:integration-tests:test -DincludeTags="integration-test" --tests org.eclipse.dataspaceconnector.samples.FileTransferAsClientIntegrationTest`
(also same for IDE you need to always pass specific -DincludeTags while executing different IT tests.)

As EDC community is already have a set process to use RUN_INTEGRATION_TEST environment variable so I thought of reusing it and built upon it.

Reviewer: Sure, but why couldn't it be yet another tag?

for minikube, create a specific tag ust for that test.

I don't think the EDC community is attached to a way of running tests, they just need one defined :)

Author: Sure, we can have a tag for that as well. But I think `RUN_INTEGRATION_TEST `environment variable also brings additional convivence for devs , for example imagine if a dev wants to run unit+ITs test for azure blob-provision module then with help of this environment variable devs can just set `RUN_INTEGRATION_TEST=true` and execute 
`./gradlew -p extensions/azure/blob-provision test` and this will execute unit+ITs for them.

But if we have default exclude tags(for the reasons mentioned above) then you always have to specify -DincludeTags and executing unit+ITs seems not possible as we do not have tags for UTs.

Reviewer: You could configure the task to (optionally) run non-tagged tests too?

if (includeTags.isNotEmpty()) {
...
}
else if (System.getProperty("RunUnitAndIntegrationTest")){
// do not include anythign
}
...

Author: Updated the approach without use of RUN_INTEGRATION_TEST and also added a way to execute all of types. Please take a look.

## Running them locally

The JUnit runner won't pick up integration tests unless the `RUN_INTEGRATION_TEST` environment variable is set to `true`

> . Also, don't forget to define any credentials that are needed and if you need to run specific integration tests then it can be achieved by passing the `includeTags` parameter to the `gradlew` command e.g. `./gradlew check -DincludeTags="azure-cosmos-db-integration-test"`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. Also, don't forget to define any credentials that are needed and if you need to run specific integration tests then it can be achieved by passing the `includeTags` parameter to the `gradlew` command:

 For Example:
 ```script
  `./gradlew check -DincludeTags="azure-cosmos-db-integration-test"`.
  ```
```

Reviewer 2: Above is more of a suggestion to break out the command to make it more readable

Author: Thanks, updated the doc as per suggestion.

          RUN_INTEGRATION_TEST: true
          POSTGRES_USER: ${{ secrets.POSTGRES_USERNAME }}
          POSTGRES_PWD: ${{ secrets.POSTGRES_PASSWORD }}

>         run: ./gradlew -p extensions/postgres/assetindex check -DincludeTags="postgres-integration-test"

Reviewer: That could go in the ADR too

>         run: ./gradlew -p extensions/postgres/assetindex check -DincludeTags="postgres-integration-test"

Author: Applied. thanks

>         run: ./gradlew -p extensions/postgres/assetindex check -DincludeTags="postgres-integration-test"

Author: Updated Integration testing doc to highlight this.
